From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
As the war in Iran enters its sixth
week, even as President Trump keeps
signaling that it's about to end, the
fighting shows no signs of letting up.
Iran continues to fire missiles at its
Gulf neighbors. The Strait of Hormuz is
still blocked.
And just this weekend, after Iran shot
down a US fighter jet, the US military
had to conduct a massive operation to
rescue a downed airman.
All the while, America's closest allies
in Europe continue to refuse Trump's
demands for help.
Today, my colleague Mark Landler
explains why European countries want no
part in this war, and how they're
getting dragged in anyway.
It's Monday, April 6th.
Mark, for the first time in recent
history, the US has gone to war without
any of our European allies joining us.
And it seems clear that President Trump
is very mad at them because of this, to
the point where Trump is now strongly
suggesting again that he's going to
leave NATO, that the US is going to pull
out of NATO. Obviously, we've seen these
threats before, and we've seen the
transatlantic relationship stressed for
quite some time now. So, put this moment
into context for me. On a scale of 1 to
10, how bad is the tension between the
US and our allies right now?
Well, Natalie, I'd be tempted to say
eight or nine on a scale of 10 because
the bitterness does seem to be running
very deep, we're in a fairly uncharted
territory with a president waging war
with no support and indeed growing
opposition to it among virtually all his
European allies. Okay, I assume this
really starts with the US not telling
our allies that we were about to go to
war with Iran in the first place.
It does, but remember
to start you really have to go even
further back. You have to look at all
the accumulated scar tissue of the first
year of the Trump administration.
President Trump came in threatening to
take over Greenland. Then he imposed
tariffs on Europe. So even before Iran,
you had a sense on the European side
that the United States was no longer an
ally and indeed in some ways was
beginning to behave like a predator. And
so all of that baggage was hanging over
the relationship when the president goes
to war against Iran with Israel and does
not even consult Europe, does not even
tell them the attack is coming. Mhm.
The United States and Israel have
launched air strikes across Iran.
President Trump says the objective is to
defend the American people by
eliminating
>> So on the morning of February 28th,
Europe wakes up to the news that the US
and Israel are carrying out military
strikes on Iran. Today's attack could
forever change the Middle East and risks
a forever war of the kind Donald Trump
had vowed to end. And they are on the
sidelines of a conflict that has direct
security implications for them.
Right. And how do they respond?
Well, they respond very cautiously. We
call for maximum restraint in the use of
force.
Respect for the lives of civilians and
the search for a diplomatic way out of
this conflict. First of all, by not
criticizing the president in any direct
way, the United Kingdom played no role
in these strikes.
But we have long been clear.
The regime in Iran is utterly abhorrent.
Even as they acknowledge that this was
not an operation they were involved in,
but regardless of that, President Trump
soon begins asking the Europeans for
help.
In some ways, it's easy stuff, giving
them overflight rights to use European
airspace. Some are more complicated. The
United States did make a request to use
British bases to launch strikes that
they call defensive strikes. Letting the
United States use military bases on
European soil. And what do our European
allies do when Trump starts making those
requests? Some countries flat-out
refuse. Spanish Prime Minister Pedro
Sánchez has denied US requests to use
his country's bases as part of the
operation. Some countries are more
willing to negotiate. We will not join
offensive action now.
But Iran is pursuing a scorched-earth
strategy.
So we are supporting the collective
self-defense
of our allies
and our people
in the region.
Because Europe is not involved in this,
they're willing to offer help for
defensive and logistical operations, but
not for offensive military operations.
And that quickly becomes a complicated
balance for them to walk.
And so, how does Trump see that? That
commitment to only do defensive actions,
but not to join up in anything
offensives.
Trump has a very black and white view of
this. If you're not helping him on the
offensive side, you're not helping him,
full stop. And so, Trump's view is that
Europe is not stepping up, is not
backing a NATO ally, and he's pretty
quick to level that criticism at them.
We're going to cut off all trade with
Spain. We don't want anything to do with
Spain. President Trump threatens to cut
off trade relations with Spain. By the
way, I'm not happy with the UK either.
Trump says that Prime Minister Keir
Starmer of Britain is, quote, not
Winston Churchill that we're dealing
with.
No Winston Churchill, but European
countries in in relatively modest, but
symbolically important ways stand up to
Trump, and that, of course, just deepens
the tension even further.
My sense, Mark, is that despite that red
line that Europe draws, they have
started to get pulled in more and more
into this conflict. Can you just
describe the extent of what they've
actually done up until this point?
Well, you're right. Europe does get
drawn in almost inevitably for a couple
of reasons. One is that some European
countries, Britain and France notably,
have military bases in the region or
near the region. And some of those bases
are inevitably targeted by Iranian
drones or Iranian missiles. So, Europe
is drawn in in terms of defending its
own bases. It's also drawn in because
European countries have security
agreements with countries in the region,
with Kuwait, with the UAE. And so,
European planes are in the air over
places like the UAE, Qatar, Kuwait,
helping defend those countries from
Iranian attacks. And then, of course,
Iran shuts down the Strait of Hormuz,
one of the world's most strategic
waterways, and the place through which
about a fifth of Europe's oil and gas
flows, and puts Europe's leaders in an
incredibly difficult position,
because then Trump asked the Europeans
to step up and forcibly reopen it. And
the Europeans refused.
After that, things start getting even
more turbulent. In a speech, Trump
lashes out specifically at NATO.
>> They're a paper tiger.
But uh so we didn't need them, but I I
asked anyway.
He says he doesn't even need their help.
We have this we really don't need any
more. Be nice to take it, but we don't
need it. Um and we sell it to Europe and
all these countries that do. You know,
China gets And that the US doesn't need
any more oil. So the Strait of Hormuz is
no longer his problem. So let them do
it. Let France do it. They get a lot of
oil from the Strait.
Let the European countries do it. He's
telling the allies to go get your own
oil.
And uh things really reach a kind of
crescendo De Gaulle, uh France, Macron
with this tit-for-tat between Trump and
President Macron of France. Who's uh
wife treats him extremely badly.
And
he's still recovering from the right to
the jaw.
You saw President Trump making fun of an
incident involving Macron and his wife.
Oh, wow. He even imitates Macron's
accent when describing their
conversation about the French supporting
the efforts in Iran. No, no, no.
You cannot do that. Do not We can
We can do that
after the war is won. Macron strikes
back.
The remarks I heard that you're
referring to are neither elegant nor
appropriate.
So I'm not going to respond to them.
They don't deserve a response.
By questioning both the worthiness of
using that kind of language during
wartime, but also questioning Trump as a
wartime leader.
So, we have to be serious. When we want
to be serious, we don't say the opposite
of what we said the day before every
day.
Well, maybe we shouldn't talk every day.
Okay. So, everyone is increasingly
frustrated with each other at this
point. What exactly has Trump's argument
been for the reason that our European
allies should be involved in this? Well,
you can boil it down to sort of two. One
is the threat of Iran getting a nuclear
weapon is every bit as imminent a threat
to Europe as it is to Israel or the
United States.
But beyond that, Europe, he says, lies
within range of Iran's ballistic
missiles. Now, that's a somewhat
debatable prop- position, but it is true
that Europe is thousands of miles closer
to Iran than the United States. So,
theoretically, European capitals,
Berlin, Paris, London, could eventually,
if not already, be within range of
Iranian missiles. So, what the president
is saying to European leaders is, "Don't
kid yourselves. The nuclear threat is as
big a danger for you as it is for us,
and the missile threat is a bigger deal
for you than it is for us." Got it.
>> And even beyond that, Donald Trump's
making an even more simple argument.
Friends help friends. These countries
are all members of NATO. One of the core
principles of the NATO alliance is
enshrined in Article 5, which says that
if any member of the alliance comes
under attack, the other members of the
alliance will step up to defend it. This
is in principle what Donald Trump is
invoking here. Of course, what European
leaders are saying to him is the US
wasn't attacked in this case. This is
not a case that invokes Article 5. So,
is that the main reason why they're not
joining the US in Iran? Because the US
wasn't attacked, but launched the
attacks first?
I think the Europeans have a number of
issues, but one of the most basic is
that there's a deep skepticism that
military strikes are going to solve the
problems that the president says they're
going to solve. Specifically on the
nuclear issue, the president has not
made a compelling and convincing
argument that a full-scale
military campaign is going to accomplish
the goal of eradicating the nuclear
program. They point out that the
highly enriched uranium that lies under
these already destroyed Iranian
facilities is going to be very hard to
get at, that Iran's already been
crippled in its nuclear program by
previous strikes led by the United
States and Israel, and so the idea of
starting a full-blown war just doesn't
seem persuasive to them. It sounds like
they're essentially not agreeing with
the strategy behind the war or the
justification for it. Is another reason
for their reluctance just that they're
looking at the situation in the Strait
of Hormuz and assessing that there
actually may be very little that they
can do to help reopen it?
Yeah, that's a very important point.
Germany and sort of asked, "What is it
that we can do that the United States
can't do?"
>> Right.
>> And other European leaders have
repeatedly said it's difficult to see a
solution in the Strait of Hormuz during
the conflict that does not simply put
our ships and our service people at risk
and doesn't necessarily solve the
problem. And is that true, Mark? Like
what could they do, actually? Well,
Europe has a couple of um competencies.
One is uh in the area of clearing mines.
They do have minesweeping ships. There
is a a very healthy debate about whether
Iran has actually laid mines in the
Strait of Hormuz, but if there was
evidence they had, the Europeans could
send minesweepers. The Europeans could
also send frigates to escort oil uh
tankers through the strait. That is
something that European navies have. The
problem with that is if you're doing it
during the conflict, those frigates
would be targets for Iranian drones and
short-range missiles and all kinds of
incoming fire. And so, I think European
leaders are dead set against doing that
while the conflict is raging. They might
be open to doing it after the conflict
as a way of bolstering the confidence of
the shipping companies.
Just this past week, France actually got
a ship through the strait. Mhm. We don't
know exactly how it happened, but it
suggests that there are possible other
methods like cutting deals with Iran.
Which, of course, would further
antagonize President Trump. So,
basically, the Europeans could do
something, but the options they have are
limited and sort of fraught. And it
generally seems as though they are
pretty uneasy about jumping in to solve
a problem they don't actually think can
be solved and then possibly being
dragged into a conflict with no clear
end. Yeah, that's right. I mean, for
them, they see all kinds of downside
risk for very little if any upside
benefit. And remember, there's a lot of
history hanging over this. Specifically,
there are two wars hanging over it. The
first was in Afghanistan, a war that
began after the 9/11 attacks on the US
when NATO did rally to the defense of
the United States.
>> Right. European troops fought alongside
the Americans in Afghanistan, which of
course turned out to be a grinding
two-decade-long conflict that ended with
the Taliban recapturing the country.
>> Mhm. It was in some ways an encyclopedia
of everything that is hard about
nation-building.
>> Yeah. In Iraq, which was very different,
that was a a war of choice rather than a
war of necessity, and it was not
supported universally. Remember, Britain
supported it, but Germany and France uh
both steered clear of it, believing that
the president at the time, George W.
Bush, had not made a compelling case
that a full-scale military invasion was
the only and best option in this case.
And Iraq has really been a source of
trauma in Europe for many years. A
lengthy, difficult conflict with all
kinds of collateral effects that ended
very unsatisfactorily.
In Britain, which supported the war, it
was so unpopular that it really poisoned
the legacy of Prime Minister Tony Blair
>> Mhm. and caused years of recrimination.
So, as these political leaders look at
Iran, they're looking at it very much
through the lens of Iraq and all the bad
memories they have of that war.
Okay, so given that history, it makes
sense why the Europeans don't want to be
in this war and why they would resist as
much as possible any effort to pull them
in even as things get worse and worse on
the ground.
Yeah, it certainly does. But, as you
say, the situation is getting worse and
worse.
Europe, which was already in the grip of
an energy crisis, is now facing
skyrocketing prices for heating oil, for
gasoline, that's beginning to bleed into
the political systems in all these
countries. And so, the crisis, whether
Europe wants it or not, has arrived at
its doorstep, and whether it can avoid
the war is no longer clear.
We'll be right back.
Mark, as unfair as it may seem to
Europe, as much as they want to stay out
of it, the war has affected the global
economy, as you said. And Europe does
depend heavily on the oil coming through
the strait. So,
they're implicated, whether they like it
or not.
Yeah, they are. There is an injustice in
this, if you like. They didn't want to
have anything to do with this war. They
weren't consulted on it. They have deep
reservations about it. And yet, they
can't stay out of it altogether, because
it has become their war, as well. Across
Europe, you see all kinds of signs of
distress. In Germany, a gallon of diesel
fuel is now over $9. Whoa. Natural gas
prices have skyrocketed in Britain.
You're seeing all kinds of potential
political upheaval. Governments are
beginning to talk about very costly
bailout problems. Governments' fiscal
plans are being upended because suddenly
there are these huge payments being
demanded to cover these energy
shortfalls. So, across the continent,
you just see a ripple effect, where the
war has changed everything. Okay, so
there is, as you're noting, a real
tension between not wanting to be
involved at all, but also experiencing
very real pain as a result of this war.
I can also imagine that, on top of all
of that, Europe relies on the US for
their security, and there is a risk in
pissing Trump off, right?
There is, indeed. And in fact, one of
the linkages that has been in the mind
of every European leader is between this
conflict and Ukraine.
If you antagonize President Trump too
much on Iran, he might pull American
support from Ukraine, and that is of
course a direct security concern for the
Europeans. So, there is a real sense of
reliance on the part of Europe on the
United States, and a real reluctance to
alienate the president so badly that he
lashes out in other areas. For example,
with tariffs, right? I mean, we've seen
in the past that Trump has punished
countries with tariffs. But, I'm
actually wondering, Mark, if our
European allies have become a little
more emboldened to stand up to Trump
than maybe they would have been in the
past because the Supreme Court recently
ruled that a lot of those tariffs were
illegal.
Do you think that was a factor here? I
do. I think that the president had two
levers. One was Ukraine, and the other
was economic through tariffs. And the
Europeans were desperate to head off the
worst of the tariffs. Well, now the
Supreme Court has done a bit of their
work for them. Doesn't mean there won't
be any tariffs, but the White House is
back to the drawing board on how they're
going to impose tariffs, what
authorities they're going to use, and it
has left the situation much more murky,
but also raised the prospect that Europe
is not going to face that particular
form of leverage, and it is something
that I think is causing them to feel
somewhat bolder toward the president.
And what about the domestic politics of
this for these European leaders? How are
these specific politicians dealing with
the potential fallout of both getting
involved or not getting involved at
home? Well, it's interesting, and it
differs depending on what party the
politicians are from. In Italy, Giorgia
Meloni, who is the leader of a far-right
party, has actually kind of developed a
reputation as a Trump whisperer. She's
viewed as someone who Trump trusts, who
can talk to Trump, but she governs in a
country where Trump is very unpopular.
And in fact, in the last couple of
weeks, the government lost a judicial
reform referendum. And one of the
reasons that they may have lost this
vote is because of a public backlash on
the war in Iran. So, this has put Meloni
in a very difficult position. In
Britain, on the other hand, you have a
Labour Prime Minister, Keir Starmer.
He's worked very hard to cultivate a
respectful relationship with President
Trump. As we discussed earlier, it
didn't shield him from being insulted by
President Trump, but in Britain, it's
actually kind of worked in Starmer's
favor because he's been able to show his
independence and stand up to the
president in a way that is popular with
a lot of the voters in Britain who don't
like Trump. So, it's a different picture
in different countries, but in all of
these countries, the leaders are walking
the same difficult balance, which is how
do we stay out of a war that our publics
don't like or support, but how do we
look like we're doing everything we can
to prevent an energy crisis from taking
over our economies?
But for now, as far as I understand it,
they're still mostly holding the line on
not getting dragged into the war, at
least not in the way that Trump wants.
And it seems as though our allies are
essentially saying, "Look, we actually
have no obligation to help in that way.
The letter of the law under NATO is that
you only get involved in wars to defend
each other after you've been attacked.
But, Mark, does Trump have a point that
the spirit of NATO is that the allies
lock arms and act together in extreme
circumstances? Take Ukraine for example.
Ukraine is not a member of NATO, and yet
after Russia's full-scale invasion of
Ukraine, the US got involved and spent
billions of taxpayer dollars to help.
So,
is Trump's expectation that the
Europeans should step up now fair?
Well, that is certainly how Donald Trump
and his allies see it. And as you say,
they cite Ukraine as a perfect example
of why Europe should step up in this
case. But, if you look at the history of
NATO, and if you talk to historians of
the alliance, it's really not a very
good analogy. NATO members are not
obligated to blindly follow the military
adventures of other members,
particularly if they think they're
unwise or poorly thought out.
>> Right. And the best example of this is
back in the 1950s, the Suez crisis, when
Britain and France allied with Israel in
an operation against Egypt, and the
United States stepped in to oppose it
because they thought it was
wrong-headed. It caused severe strains
in the alliance, but it laid a predicate
for the way that NATO members should
behave, particularly if they don't
support what another NATO member is
doing. So, the history of NATO is not
one of unanimity in every conflict. It
is, after all, an alliance of democratic
countries who have their own democracies
and their own political systems to deal
with. So, I think the obligation for a
NATO member is to give another NATO
member a fair hearing, to listen to
their argument, and if they support it,
to join. But, absent Article 5, they are
not obligated to do so, and in this
case, they have decided not to. You saw
it in Iraq, but even before that, you
saw it in the Suez crisis.
So, given everything you've described,
this tightrope that our European allies
are walking,
what do they do? What are their options?
Well, they don't have great options, but
they are working on a couple of
different levels. On a diplomatic level,
the Europeans are continuing to deploy
what have been tried and true weapons in
the past. King Charles is going to the
United States on a state visit.
>> Trump loves the royals.
>> Trump loves the royals. And although
there have been some voices in Britain
asking why is this a good time for King
Charles to go to the US, they're forging
ahead with the trip, and I think their
calculation is that it will buy them
some goodwill. It will be a reminder to
the president of why he values Britain
as an ally, and it will maybe smooth out
some of these rough edges. For the
Europeans as a whole, on a more gritty
operational level, they are starting to
make plans for how to secure the Strait
of Hormuz after this war is over. The
British organized a virtual conference
call of 35 countries to talk about what
this coalition might look like, what
countries would contribute to it, what
sorts of military assets would be
deployed, whether it would be
minesweepers or escort ships, and uh
there's going to be further, even more
operational meetings about putting this
whole coalition together. This coalition
does not include the United States, much
as the coalition of the willing that the
Europeans have put together to secure a
ceasefire in Ukraine also doesn't
include the United States. But really
both of these efforts underscore the
limitations the Europeans face. In the
case of Ukraine and the coalition of the
willing, there's a general recognition
that unless the United States stays
involved, offers some form of security
guarantees, this whole effort really
doesn't have a lot of teeth to it. And
likewise, I think with the coalition
that would secure the Strait of Hormuz,
if the United States doesn't put its
military might and its credibility
behind an effort to keep the strait
open, it's really highly unlikely that
the Europeans are going to be able to do
it on their own. So, while these efforts
show how Europe is grappling with, if
you will, a post-American world, it's
also revealing why the United States
remains such a central part of the
equation. Yeah, we've been talking a lot
about the divergence between the US and
its European allies, but what you're
saying raises the question of how viable
it is for the two sides to split, for
this relationship to actually rupture
long-term.
It doesn't seem possible, really. Both
sides are truly invested in it. Yeah,
that's right. Europe and the United
States are really almost like a married
couple that's hit a very rough patch.
They may be even living in different
houses, but they share so many assets,
they have so many common interests, that
the price of splitting is perhaps even
higher than the pain of figuring out how
to stay together.
For Europe, staring down the barrel of
an economic crisis and a security
crisis,
the price of divorcing from the United
States
is still probably too painful.
Well, Mark, thank you so much. Thank
you, Natalie.
On Easter Sunday, after receiving no
assistance from US allies in securing
the Strait of Hormuz, Trump again
threatened Iran, suggesting he would
strike Iranian energy infrastructure on
Tuesday if the regime didn't end its
blockade.
In a profane social media post, Trump
said, "Open the straight, you
crazy bastards, or you'll be living in
hell. Just watch."
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Saturday night, US forces executed
what's been described as one of the most
challenging and complex missions in the
history of US special operations to
rescue the service member whose fighter
jet was shot down in Iran, the first
loss to enemy fire since the start of
the war.
Initially, neither the Americans nor the
Iranians knew where the injured officer
was hiding in a mountain crevice after
he ejected from the cockpit of his jet.
The airman, a weapon system officer,
evaded capture for more than 24 hours,
at one point hiking up a 7,000-ft
ridgeline.
While he was hiding, the CIA had
initiated a deception campaign to try to
convince Iranian forces that the airman
had already been rescued and was moving
out of the country.
After the agency identified his
location, US attack aircraft dropped
bombs and opened fire on Iranian convoys
to keep them away from the area.
In the end, Navy SEAL Team Six commandos
extracted the officer, who was then
flown into Kuwait for medical treatment.
President Trump celebrated the rescue on
social media, saying, "We got it." and
noting that there were no casualties
among the rescue team.
Trump said the airman had sustained
injuries, but would be just fine.
Today's episode was produced by Caitlin
O'Keefe, Mooj Zadie, Asta Chaturvedi,
and Michael Simon Johnson. It was edited
by Maria Byrne and Brendan Klinkenberg
with help from Paige Cowett and contains
music by Diane Wong, Marion Lozano, and
Dan Powell. Our theme music is by
Wonderly. This episode was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.